Hi, Ed. How are you doing this morning? Oh, very good, thank you. I am just
testing fine. How... Yeah, if this thing starts clicking, you'll see me come
over there and buy a time without permission. And where's my cough button?
Okay, first of all, I'll ask you what's your definition of science fiction? My
definition of science fiction is pretty vague. Aside from weaseling out of the
definition, which I ordinarily do when people ask me that, because I keep
pointing out all the exceptions that can be made to almost any definition, I
finally get backed around into a corner where I suggest that, first of all,
science fiction is essentially the same as any other fiction. It's fiction about
people, about characters, about the relationships between one character and
another, or one character in a group, which may be society. With the difference
from mainstream fiction being that in science fiction there is some sort of
scientific or technological development which is important to the story, and
which affects those human relationships between person and other person or
person and people as a group.
Okay, you're a science fiction writer. What occurred in your background to point
you in the direction of, A, being a writer, and B, being a science fiction
writer as opposed to something else, some other genre? I think probably growing
up as an alien, in an alien land. My family reared me in rural Wyoming. I was a
product of a ranch background. And in this environment, I didn't have any
younger brothers or sisters who were anywhere close to my age. I didn't have any
neighbor kids to play with, so I had to learn to amuse myself for a good many
years. I also didn't particularly like living in the rural West, and so I sought
escape. And these things coalesced into reading a lot of science fiction and
fantasy. And I suspect that because of this ill-spent background as a kid, that
when I started writing, I naturally tended to write the sorts of things that I'd
read so often. By no means did I read only science fiction or fantasy, and a
case could be made for why didn't I write sea stories or dog stories or
biographies of American heroes. But still, science fiction and fantasy had been
in the ascendancy. And so that's what I started writing. You grew up in the
Sputnik era, as I did, and it influenced me a lot, what I later became. Were you
influenced by those heady days of the space race and science and that sort of
thing? It's a terrible thing to admit, but unlike when John F. Kennedy died,
which is one test of anyone who was of thinking age in 1963, I cannot remember
in 1957 what I was doing when I heard about Sputnik. Almost anyone else who is
my age who is writing or reading science fiction can remember exactly what they
were doing and how they felt when the Russian satellite went up. I have blanked
it completely out of my history. It's possible that I connected with some
horrible incident in my childhood, and that's why I can't recall it. At the same
time, certainly the Sputnik-inspired influence on American education is
something that I can't remember, because it must have been about that time that
people in my school, as in schools everywhere else around America, were urging
me to get into some sort of scientific or technical career. And this was
probably the first step in the process that led to my taking up an aerospace
engineering major in college, which was something that I soon junked. But at the
time, I found myself in that sort of technically-oriented program, which I had
simply never questioned, because at that time, that place, I was in a culture,
specifically Southern Wyoming, which said that if I were college-bound and male,
I would end up being an engineer, and that was that, and there were no other
alternatives. God knows no one was supposed to end up going into, say, writing
for a career. That was unheard of.
You're a Clarion product. How much influence did this have on your career, this
Clarion background? It had an incalculable effect, or maybe it is calculable in
the sense that I probably, or I quite possibly wouldn't have a professional
writing career had it not been for Clarion. I went to the first of the Clarion
workshops in the summer of 1967.
68? I think I'm getting to be senile. I went to the first Clarion workshop in
1968, and of course, there was no pre-existing Clarion mystique. That was the
first one. I went because I was bored with having gone through five straight
years of undergraduate and graduate work. I didn't know what I was going to be
when I grew up, certainly not what I was going to be when I got out of graduate
school. I was being programmed once again, this time to handle six composition
courses in a junior college, something like that. So, at Clarion, I met for the
first time working writers. This had never happened before. I didn't know what
professional writing was all about. All I knew was that like most of the other
people at the workshop, I had been a real hot shot in college writing courses
and in English classes in high school, and I had no idea exactly how bad a
writer I actually was. So, I had the opportunity to meet very rigorous critics
such as Judith Merrill or Kate Wilhelm or Damon Knight and met for the first
time such people as Fritz Leiber and Robin Wilson and Harlan Ellison. And this
was an incredible illumination for me. I got to find out what people who
actually got their stories and their books published were like, how they did it,
I had had no conception of the professional side of writing. And again, this was
revelatory to me. But most of all, I was up against people who knew what writing
was about and who could read my work and tell me how incredibly awful it was.
But more important than that, to tell me what I was doing wrong and extend some
of the possibilities that I could try for trying to improve my work. The
information I have indicates that pretty soon after Clarion, Harlan Ellison was
your mentor or some word. Did this also have a positive influence on your
career? Would you be where you are today without that? I might or might not be,
I don't know. I wouldn't be as far along in my career had that not happened.
What actually happened at Clarion was I had the dubious distinction of writing
the first story by any Clarion writer that was accepted for professional
publication. And that was simply because during the week that Harlan was the
guest writer, I wrote a from scratch story. All my other stories had been
rewrites of stories I'd done for college classes and had been uniformly trashed
by everyone present. Then I did a completely original story. The next week
presented it to Harlan, who then turned around and bought it as one of the first
couple of stories he was purchasing for the Again Dangerous Visions anthology.
And this had a great positive reinforcement because I was getting $150 in pre
-inflation, 1968 dollars. I had the ego boost of knowing that my story was going
to be in a book which would be in bookstores and on library shelves. And of
course, immediately I had the fantasy that this was going to become a major
motion picture. There'd be a spin-off series that would be serialized in
McCall's and so forth and so on. I'd be on the Dick Cavett Show and the Tomorrow
Show and Tonight Show, This Morning Show. But it, of course, didn't happen that
way. But at the same time, Harlan was responsible for my first professional
sale. After that, as our relationship extended, and not only was my editor, but
he became a close personal friend as well, I took up his invitation to visit in
Southern California, encountered yet another alien culture that I wasn't used
to. And it was a peculiar sort of apprenticeship, and I don't think
apprenticeship is so far off as a term. I got to observe Harlan's professional
life. I saw how he functioned as a writer. I got to see through Harlan how other
writers functioned each in his or her own way as a writer. But particularly with
Harlan, I got to see, again, that professional side of writing. I got to see how
Harlan coped with agents, editors, script editors, publishers, art directors,
and so forth and so on. And it was very, very important to me to learn such
things from Harlan as ways I could pursue to safeguard the integrity of my work
from the point it left my typewriter to the point at which it appeared in print
on the page. The collaboration with Ellison, which came out as Phoenix Without
Ashes, must have taught you a lot about how you interact and preserve the
integrity of work with the studio. How did that collaboration work? I got a call
from Harlan one day saying I'd already known about the series, The Star Lost,
that he was going to do. It was a syndicated videotaped science fiction series,
at first a mini series, that was to be done with joint U.S.-Canadian
participation and taped in Toronto. And it sounded like a great idea. This was
going to be an adult television series. So Harlan contacted me saying that he
would like to see a novel written based on his pilot script for the series. And
this, of course, was before the series started to be subverted by the various
elements that finally caused Harlan to pull out his name and his participation
from the show and to condemn the program in print before it actually ever went
on the air. And he simply offered me the opportunity to write a book based on
the first script with an amazing amount of freedom. He said that he trusted me.
He trusted me professionally. And therefore, since after all, the script was
only 62 pages long and I was expected to come up with something like 260 pages
of manuscript for the novel itself, I had carte blanche as far as developing new
subsidiary characters, subplots, expanding on the existing characters and plots.
Essentially, I could do whatever I wanted to as long as I remained true to the
spirit of what Harlan had already done. And I immediately was seized with an
overwhelming sense of responsibility that caused me to stop writing altogether
until I was very close to the deadline for this book. And then I essentially did
the work in something like three weeks. Now, when I was done with the manuscript
and shipped it off to Harlan, I waited with a great deal of apprehension to see
how the man was going to react. And we actually didn't have a whole lot to
quarrel about. Harlan was essentially happy with what I'd done. And there was
only one major plot thing that he took issue about. And that was I had decided
to have the heroine lose her virginity in this book. Harlan argued with this,
saying that he had this great scene plan for her to lose her virginity in the
second book in the series. So not wanting to waste work. How can I put this
delicately? I simply rewrote my scene so that it was basically all there except
that she did not lose her virginity at the end. Harlan had his plot machination.
I was still able to keep what I thought was a decent scene. Unfortunately, the
second novel in the series, and Harlan and I have planned out three, has never
been written and so has never appeared. And naturally, neither has the third.
There is that possibility. But Harlan stays very, very busy. And the opportunity
simply hasn't come up to do any of the other books in the series. So it's just a
heavy petting scene instead of a... It's a frustrating scene. Looks like she
will regain her virgin for a while longer. A long while. Okay. Now we get
sticky. Okay. Other than that collaboration, you have written and sold to the
public only short stories. Why do you work in the short story medium as opposed
to a novel medium? It's not a matter of conscious choice. I write what I do
because that is what I do. I plan to write novels. Of course, I've been planning
to write novels for a long time. My publisher is expecting by October 1st a
novel which was originally contracted in 1974. And this is a long while to be
dithering about completing the book.
Short stories, for whatever reason, and I can't consciously point them out, I
can't point out the why, have just always seemed to me the appropriate medium
that I should work in. In some ways, I... To a degree, I feel like short stories
are mini novels. Because I have often spent much more time in terms of working
out the characterizations, the plots, and so forth and so on, more than the
amount of space in that short story would indicate. And there are stories of
mine that seem to me to be almost compressed novels that, under other
circumstances, were I more prolific writer, I probably could have expanded them
out another 54,000 words and got a nice, you know, paperback original novel. But
I like to work with the compression sometimes. I like to pack an incredible
amount, which is a risk of course, because... I fully recognize that a lot of
people who read my stuff don't care to deal in that sort of thing. They don't
want to have to worry about putting that kind of energy into reading a short
story that they might ordinarily apply to at least starting to approach a novel.
Are you familiar with the MacArthur Prize? With this... They just select people
of great promise. Oh, yeah. Okay. Right. Scenario. You get a knock on the door
one day and they say, Ed, you're going to get $100,000 a year tax-free every
year for life. Mm-hmm. Would you write a novel? Is the... The urge to write a
novel, is it commercially induced or is it bubbling in there and you've got to
write it? I think it's probably the second. Yeah, I... I can imagine myself
getting $100,000 a year for life, something like that, and just becoming a
parasite, spending the rest of my life in enforced idleness, and not only not
writing novels, but also not writing short stories. I hope that wouldn't happen.
That's a long... You know, that's a parallel to the... To the question about
what would you do on a desert island if you had the bottles to put the
manuscript in and ship them off into the water, and if you had the paper and so
forth and so on, but you had no guarantee that anyone would read your
manuscript, would you still write? It's a great parlor game, and I think that
I'm being honest when I say, yeah, sure, I'd continue writing, but I wouldn't
know for certain until I'd actually tried it. And with the matter of my income
being provided, I think, I really believe that there are things that I want to
write about that I can treat much better as novels, but I can't as short
stories. And I think I would do that. I think right now my... The bottleneck
factor is that I haven't done a scratch novel that's worked. I've done Phoenix,
which is a novelization. I've done Cinnabar, which is a sort of piecework novel
made up of parts that were originally published as short stories. And I've done
a 60,000-word novel, which remains in my files, has never been rewritten, has
never been submitted professionally, is not science fiction or fantasy. It's the
traditional college novel that editors know and abominate. They get thousands of
them every year. They're the novels that people write just after college in
which the young writer says, Well, I have come of age in this society, and here
are the wonderful truths that I have learned. And they put all this into
fiction, and it's usually just pretty terrible stuff.
Cinnabar came out. I picked it up because Science Fiction Review Monthly said,
let's see, I have the quote, Imagine the dying earth written by Moorcock at his
very best. Couldn't have written the blurb better myself. That was a... Hey,
I've got to read this.
Give me a little bit of background on how these stories evolved, what you
were... had pictured, and how they developed that sort of thing with this group
of stories. Right. Well, the... No matter whether it's a short story or a novel,
No matter how complex the ultimate product might be originally, there always is
the single image somewhere along the line that everything else generated from.
In the case of Cinnabar, I suppose the overriding image is the city itself. The
city that exists presumably millions of years in our future, and may or may not
exist here on earth. That's never really spelled out, nor did I feel it
important to do so. Although I suspect to pin down, I would suggest that
Cinnabar is probably very close to Phoenix, Arizona. I shouldn't be surprised.
But in the late 1960s, I just had the image of the far future, very colorful,
emerald city of Oz sort of apparition wavering out there on the desert horizon.
And of course, once the image was there, then all the questions of both fiction
in general, and science fiction in particular, generated such as, okay, what is
that city all about? Who lives there? What do they do? I wanted to write about a
city of such sophistication and decadence that science and technology, as Arthur
C. Clarke put in a different context, might as well be magic. And I wanted to,
in terms of the human element, investigate what would people do with their
access to immortality, with their access to technological powers beyond compare?
Would their lives be any less screwed up than they are now in 20th century
America, or not? So again, I was going back to that original premise that I
believe in, that good fiction is about people and their relationships. And if
you have access to physical immortality, for example, how does this affect your
relationship with the people that are closest to you, and the people that you
interact with every day on the street? And that's what Cinnabar finally is all
about. And it came as a great surprise to me, as I wrote these stories about
that fabulous city, that there was an all-over structure that seemed to be
coming out independent of each individual story. And that's why, when you read
the stories all together in a book, I feel there is a clear-cut beginning and a
clear-cut ending, and there is a progress made through the stories, almost as
though one were reading a from-scratch novel, even though, of course, it isn't.
I weasel a lot with the definition of what is a novel there and what isn't. But
still, the background is the same from story to story. Most of the characters
are the same from story to story. The image of the city and not the characters
is what developed first. Yes. Okay. Yes. The characters are quite memorable, and
the names are intriguing, too. Did those just surface? Did you have to work hard
to develop these characters?
Unlike Isaac Asimov, I don't keep incredibly detailed journals of every hour, of
every day of my life. And probably I should, because I have, for example, I have
a vague memory with one of the primary characters in Cinnabar, Tourmaline Hayes,
the network star, that her name was originally something else, some other
gemstone. And I seem to recall doodling on a piece of paper, you know, things
like, let's see, Sapphire Hayes, Emerald Hayes, Ruby Hayes, and so forth and so
on, until finally I came up with Tourmaline.
And, but why I picked that particular name, for example, with that particular
character, I can't tell you now. Sometimes with my stories, I can remember very
specifically the generation of a character trait, a name, or whatever. I know
that there was a certain amount of floundering around at the time. And, of
course, now the city title, strangely enough, came originally from a photograph
of a horse. My mother, in her living room, has a beautiful photograph of the
head of a Palomino. This was a picture she told me about when I was growing up,
because this was the horse that she used to ride in the summers out at a dude
ranch in upstate New York called the Cinnabar. And I'd always loved the sound of
the word. It conjured up all sorts of images for me that I think went far beyond
your standard upstate New York dude ranch. And then later on I found out that
the Cinnabar, one summer in the late 1930s, was where my father and mother had
met. The romance that led to their marriage and my consequent existence as a
human being had all come from that. And, but originally there was that image of
the Palomino there on the wall at the Cinnabar. And that was the first time I
knew about the city and that was the first time I started speculating about it.
What's our time? So that's 13. Okay. In the acknowledgements in Cinnabar, you
mentioned Joan Bernat, who pioneered in the writing of Cinnabar stories, quote
unquote. I don't, I'm not familiar with her. What's, what kind of stories did
she write or what did she do that inspired her? Joan Bernat was a very good
writer at the early Clarion workshop. Who did a, excuse me. Joan Bernat was a
very good writer who did a number of stories at the early Clarion workshops,
which were published in various anthologies. And I have no idea where she is
now. But at one point in the workshop, we'd done an exercise in which each of us
came up with various narrative hooks. First lines of stories, which were
calculated to catch the interest of the reader. And I had done a story, a story
hook, which went along the lines of, oh, I think the road to Cinnabar was lined
with the shells of burned out school buses. And I had no particular reason for
coming up with this line other than, to me, it was interesting. And also this
was vaguely tied in with my image of Cinnabar the city. Well, a number of people
in the workshop borrowed other people's narrative hooks and wrote stories around
them. And Joan Bernat actually did the first Cinnabar story in the sense that
she wrote a story which started with that line. And her Cinnabar was not quite
the same as mine, but still there was something of the feeling about it. The,
the almost surrealistic image of the city wavering on the horizon. The city,
which is totally cut off from the entire rest of the world. In fact, for all
intents and purposes, is the entire world. And so that's why Joan Bernat got the
acknowledgement at the beginning of the book. Because in that sense, she did do
the pioneering effort and did write the first Cinnabar story. As far as I know,
that story has never been published. And out of a sense of nostalgia, I would
like to get my hands on a copy of the manuscript to see if the story is anything
like I remember it from those summer days in 1968. Do you ever consider writing
any more Cinnabar stories? Will we see any more? I've thought about it. I have
notes on several Cinnabar stories, including the possibility of doing five
novelettes, which would come together as another makeup novel about the
character Jade Blue. I have never completed any of these stories, and perhaps I
never will. My publisher, my publisher and I would like to do a new edition of
Cinnabar with a brand new Cinnabar story in it. But I don't know. I just haven't
been able to do a Cinnabar story. It may be that its time has passed in terms of
my own professional nature. The Cinnabar stories that I've got planned out would
take place before the time of the stories in the book itself. Because of course,
at the end of the book, I don't think I'm giving away any plot secrets here.
Cinnabar is in the process of being destroyed. And I've had no desire to write
stories about Cinnabar after the fall. But before, there are still
possibilities. I would like to do, for example, a story about a man in Cinnabar
who comes up with the greatest decadent luxury anyone could have. I thought for
a long time about what single luxury would be the most decadent, the most
useless example of conspicuous affluence. And I realized, of course, that
probably what would be
comprised in that would be having your own roller coaster. I mean, think how
decadent to have your own roller coaster sitting out behind your house, which
only you use, or your friends, of course. And so I immediately, because I love
roller coasters a lot, started to design my own version of the ultimate roller
coaster. And that is going to be the central image in that particular story, if
it's ever written. Another Cinnabar story, which is yet unwritten, is what
happens when Tourmaline Hayes decides to have an enormous party at which she
invites every single one of her old lovers, of which she has quite a few. And
this will simply be a party at which you have no idea whether it's going to be a
romantic comedy or a murder mystery. A lot of possibilities there. The roller
coaster might make for a nice book cover if they'll do it right. Indeed.
Particle theory, the story, not the collection, seemed a little bit unique to me
because it was an analog story, and it was a little more of the hard science,
quote unquote, than we usually see in your work. Apparently this story evolved
over a long period of time, is that correct? Yes. Okay.
Okay. I better go on for... Was I supposed to pick up the ball there? Say
something. Talk a minute. Okay.
Okay. Okay. Particle theory came about because I read a newspaper article about
pion beam therapy, using a stream of solid particles, sub-nuclear particles, to
attack cancerous tumors, which I have just found out is a line of research that
has just been abandoned down at Los Alamos. I'm not sure why, whether it's
funding cutbacks or whether they've simply found better means to attack the
medical problem. But at any rate, what had intrigued me a number of years ago in
the paper is now apparently scientifically dead. And yeah, this is more of a
hard science story than I customarily write, but I think it exhibits a more
general principle, which is that I or every other writer who may not be all that
soundly based in science and technology by discipline or by vocation, need
simply only use the research tools that we all presumably learned in junior high
to get across a hard science story without being overly didactic about it. What
I discovered in this story was that the world is full of experts who were quite
willing to share with me their specialized knowledge, whether it was particle
beam physics or whether it was the landscape around Los Alamos and little
details for verisimilitude, such as what airline do you fly into Los Alamos on
and what sort of planes are you in and all of that kind of thing. True,
ordinarily I don't use quite so much scientific content. All I can say is this
was one of the stories in which that content seemed appropriate. And it exhibits
my own, in a sense, my own sense of frustration with being typecast. I write
what I like to write and sometimes that may be a story which is full of medical
research about prostate cancer and particle beam therapy for that cancer and
cosmology, all that. And other times I will write science fiction stories in
which there is not a speck of hard research or hard fact. Again, I suppose it
illustrates the difference between facts and truths to be facile about it. But
it also shows that good research can cover a multitude of sins. In this case it
simply seemed appropriate. I think this story for me is still a people story,
first and foremost. It's again about relationships of people and the scientific
content amplifies, illustrates and I hope clarifies those relationships. But by
God, the people still come first and the science and technology come second.
Okay, we've got ten minutes. Okay, I have two questions. I'll cut it to two
questions when you work and then I want to mention the Labor Day group. Although
I can try, I can be quicker in my answers. No, no, no, no, no. I, I, it's, I, my
main regret in all this is that we only, we always only have an hour or so
because it gets pretty fat. You guys probably don't like that, but we think it's
interesting. Okay. The story that blew me away in that collection was, and I
hope I get the pronunciation, the Hibakusha Gallery. Right. Okay, I don't like
to ask where do you get your ideas, but where did you get that idea? That, that,
that just, phew. Well, the Hibakusha Gallery, I'd
be lying if I said that the Hibakusha Gallery didn't come from the central
image, which is the strange gallery that is presumably in a near future America,
where people come to have their pictures taken, standing behind the cutouts of
nuclear blast survivors from Hiroshima and Nagasaki, where the faces of the
original subjects of the photographs have been eliminated and the faces of the
tourists have been substituted. And of course the, the image goes back to the
Jones Beach sort of tourist emporiums in New Jersey, on the boardwalk where you
stand behind the, the beach bunny or the muscle builder, and your face is
superimposed over there. There, there's, you get souvenir photographs. And I
really can't tell you why that image came about originally, except that was the
image. The image was so incredibly powerful, I didn't know what to do with it
for a long time. And I had a lot of false starts with that story. I wrote that
story and rewrote that story more completely than any other story I'd done up to
that time. I, in some senses, took two and a half years to write the story,
because I couldn't quite get it right. I kept adding all sorts of false plot
elements that just didn't work out. I didn't know, I didn't know what to do with
the materials of the story. Um, the story certainly is not perfect now, but I
finally reached a point where I felt that it was largely successful in terms of
getting across what I wanted to get across. So much of, so much of writing for
me seems to be unconscious. For probably the first two years of writing that
story, I had no idea what the story was actually about. What I've come to
believe it's about is not anything as simple as, you know, the horrors of
nuclear war or anything quite that blatant. But more I realized I was dealing
with something different. I was dealing with the guilt of the survivor. I was
dealing with the mental set of people who have lived on through some sort of
Holocaust when everyone else around them has died. And, you know, the obvious
interpretation, well, you know, you've been lucky you lived when all the others
around you perished. Don't you feel lucky? And of course those survivors rarely
do. They go through a psychological syndrome in which they feel guilty because
they lived and others died. And the question was, how does a person cope with
that? And that was the problem that I was attacking in this particular story.
Um, one of the things that's pleased me about the story was that it finally sold
outside the science fiction community. I mean, it is a science fiction story, I
suppose. It takes place in a speculative future. Yet it's sold outside of
science fiction. It was published in a non-science fiction magazine,
specifically Penthouse. And then such things happen to it as, oh, a student
filmmaker at UCLA who doesn't read science fiction ordinarily, read that story,
wrote to me through my agent and said, you know, I'm blown away by this
particular image. I would like to do a film based on the story. The man has done
that film. It took him two and a half years to do the film, you know, waiting on
tables. It was a senior project. Um, I got to see the film in its final cut last
September and was incredibly impressed. A very professional job. Aside from the
fact that that filmmaker has, I think, a very bright career ahead of him, this
was the first time that I've seen my work on the screen in any form. And there
was that magic virginal moment when for the very first time I saw words that I
had written, dialogue that I had created, characters that I had described up
there in living color on a huge screen, talking and acting and interacting. And
that was a separate magic in itself. But I think that the reason that the first
of my stories to go to film was that one, just because of the power of the
original image. It struck people and still strikes people. And I'm, I'm glad for
that. Yeah. Yeah. That's by far my favorite. Okay. Let's, uh, let me ask this
one and then we'll, I have to, we'll stop on this one, but I got to ask about
sharks. Why sharks? What's your interest in sharks? Why sharks? You
know, when people visit my apartment, they see all sorts of shark paraphernalia,
you know, jaws mounted on backboards and, uh, shark mobiles, shark paintings and
so forth and so on. The reason for the shark motif and the reason that I suppose
I've adopted the shark as a sort of totem is because in the early seventies, one
of my closest friends had dreamed the night before. And she told me about this
at breakfast, that she had been in the body of a shark. She had seen the world
through a shark colored lenses. And we talked about this for a while, you know,
got past the obvious Freudian symbolism of it all. And I was fascinated by the
dream. Then she catalyzed action by saying, listen, why don't you write a story
about sharks? Now, I didn't know anything about sharks. I was just an inland boy
who'd grown up far from the sea. And although the ocean has always fascinated
me, I didn't know about sharks, but I did my research just as with say particle
theory. I found out about sharks. I became intrigued by their position in the,
in the evolutionary scheme of things, how incredibly well developed they are.
And I was also struck by such images as the fact that the shark is the major
species of creature, which is hostile to human beings, which is in no danger of
extinction, at least at this point. So I took my friend's original dream. And I
said, okay, I've got a character who wants to be a shark. Why does she want to
be a shark? How does she become a shark, both metaphorically and literally? And
that's how the original shark story generated. I realized after finishing the
story that there were other things that involved sharks that I had not dealt
with in the story that I would treat in various other pieces. What happened
then, of course, was the older you get, I think the harder you are to shop for
for your friends and relatives. They don't know what to get you. They know what
your tastes are. They don't know what books you've read or what albums you don't
have. So somehow the shark story caught the fancy of the people around me and
they started giving me shark paraphernalia. And before I knew it, I had more
sharks than I knew what to do with. I'm glad it was sharks because, um, jaws
notwithstanding, there never has been that much in the way of shark artifacts
for sale. If it had been unicorns or dragons, say, I would have been swamped
completely and utterly. And I could have knick-knack and gee-gaw garage sales.
But instead, I've got some pretty neat shark stuff. I would say though that
people ask me, do I really like sharks? And I have to admit, I don't like
sharks. Nobody likes sharks. But I respect sharks. And sharks as an emblem, as a
symbol, truly do fascinate me. And I expect there will be other shark stories.
There may even be a shark novel. What militates against a shark novel, of
course, quite aside from any of my own feelings about writing a novel, is I
probably have to wait for the furor of Peter Benchley's jaws to continue dying
down.
Okay, let's let him go.